When Khalid Skah stepped on
the podium in 1992,
two days after winning the
men's 10,000 metres,
the Barcelona crowd made it
clear what it thought of the
Moroccan's performance.
The jeers that rained down on
Skah greeted one of the most
controversial victories in
modern Olympic Games history.
In the minds of those fans,
Skah was one of the all-time
Olympic Games sinners,
alongside his team-mate and
alleged co-conspirator,
Hammou Boutayeb.
The men stood accused of
engineering a cynical triumph
that went beyond the limits
of acceptable race strategy.
Richard Chelimo of Kenya
had been denied gold by his
archrivals
from North Africa,
who had run the race as a team.
The accusations were far
from proven.
Boutayeb's behaviour was
certainly unusual,
but in the eyes of some
observers, he was innocent.
Perhaps it was karma.
The Kenyans themselves had
often been accused of
some dubious team racing.
Either way, Skah's triumph
felt very hollow indeed.
In 1992, the Kenyans and
Moroccans were the kings of
long-distance running.
Morocco had the reigning
Olympic champion in its ranks,
but Kenya dominated
the 10,000 metres at the
World Championships the
previous year.
Eight of the world's 11 fastest
men
over the distance were Kenyan.
In Barcelona, the scene was set
for the next battle.
The atmosphere was hostile.
And by the time the race
was 6,500 metres old,
all other parties slipped away.
It was Chelimo verus Skah,
head-to-head.
That, at least, was how it
seemed.
But coming towards
the end of lap 22,
the race leaders encountered
that man, Boutayeb.
He was second last, a back
marker,
a man whose only job now was to
move aside and be lapped.
But Boutayeb would not be
moved.
And what happened over the next
few laps
was the source of
the controversy.
Boutayeb wouldn't get out
of the way.
Chelimo and Skah overtook him,
but then he overtook them right
back.
They passed again,
but Boutayeb run alongside
them,
then he got back in front.
What was Boutayeb doing
back there, anyway?
He was 36,
but still an elite athlete.
It looked like
a Moroccan conspiracy.
The idea seemed to be too slow
down and distract Chelimo
with all the suspicious
shenanigans,
and then allow Skah to run
clear.
Race officials thought it was
odd.
The chairman of the IAAF
technical committee
stepped onto the track
to try and hold back Boutayeb.
The crowd grew restless,
and booed what they saw.
And even after Skah sprinted
clear of Chelimo
to cross the line first,
and blew kisses to the
supporters,
he found he had few.
They believed they had
witnessed a con.
Almost immediately,
the authorities concurred.
The IAAF disqualified Skah,
citing a breach of rule 143.2.
But Skah said he had no idea
what Boutayeb had been up to.
They weren't even friends.
Skah said Boutayeb was an
animal and an imbecile.
TRANSLATION: I think as a
former champion it was
an embarrassment for him
to be lapped.
The authorities were stung by
claims
that they had been hasty.
Skah said they were racist
and thieves.
And the IAAF relented again.
They reinstated Skah and gave
him the gold medal.
But what was the truth?
Will we ever know?
Chelimo said he heard Boutayeb
and Skah talking to each other
on the track.
What was being said?
TRANSLATION: I was yelling at
him to go away.
"You are making big troubles.
You are making big troubles."
But inside the big stadium
was 50,000 people yelling
and whistling, you cannot hear
anything.
The Kenyans threatened to walk
out.
The credibility of the sport
was in jeopardy.
But Boutayeb remained silent,
even as Skah stepped onto
the podium
to receive his medal.
What could I do?
It was my duty and obligation
to go out there and face it as
best
as I could. I was smiling, but
very sad inside.
My honour was at stake.
And I would not go out and face
them if I had felt I had
dishonoured myself.